Class/Trait Invariants (#6313)
dafny-lang/dafny: docs/DafnyRef/Specifications.md

An invariant can have [custom error and success messages](#sec-error-attribute).

#### 7.1.7.1 Class and Trait Invariant Clauses

With the `--check-invariants` flag enabled, Dafny supports invariant clauses within class and trait declarations.
Such clauses constitute an _object invariant_ for the instances of such a declaration. As a result, it (almost) always
holds of an object. For example,

```dafny
<!-- %check-verify %options --type-system-refresh --check-invariants -->
class Account {
  var credit: nat
  var debit: nat
  invariant credit - debit >= 0 // Note: can't use Balance() here as it asserts this.invariant()
  // ^ can be referred to as this.invariant()
  function Balance(): nat
    reads this
  {
    // uses the invariant to be well-defined (i.e., to be of type nat)

>     assert this.invariant(); credit - debit

Author: Yep - working on that now based on an idea that Remy had

>     assert this.invariant(); credit - debit

Author: Update: the invariant axiom now has triggers computed from the invariant body, so `assert`s like this are no longer needed

  }
  method Withdraw(amount: nat)
    requires Balance() - amount >= 0
    ensures Balance() == old(Balance()) - amount
    modifies this
  {
    // invariant holds before
    debit := debit + amount;
    // invariant holds after
  }
  method Deposit(amount: nat)
    ensures Balance() == old(Balance()) + amount
    modifies this
  {
    credit := credit + amount; // same as above
  }
}
```

However, invariant checking is disabled within the body of an instance method until exit _unless_ it makes a call to

> another function or method. For example,

Author: Confirmed - all invariant checks at call sites are relative to the reads clause of the callee

```dafny
(static) method Invalidate(a: Account)
  modifies a
{
  a.credit := 0; // error: invariant may not hold after assignment
}
```

At the moment, a class extending a trait that has an invariant cannot declare its own invariant and, vice versa,
a class extending an ordinary trait _can_ declare its own invariant, _but not_ referring to fields declared in the trait.
As a result, upcasting an instance of that class to its supertype is sound, because any modifications made to it
are not read by the class’s invariant. For example,

```dafny
<!-- %check-verify %options --type-system-refresh --check-invariants -->
trait Base {
  var x: int
  function FooSpec(): int
    reads this
  method Foo() returns (r: int)
    ensures r == FooSpec()
  // If Base declared an invariant, then Derived couldn't
}

class Derived extends Base {
  var y: int
  invariant y != 0 // note: invariant can't refer to x
  function FooSpec(): int
    reads this
  {
    1 / y
  }
  method Foo() returns (r: int)
    ensures r == FooSpec()
  {
    r := FooSpec();
  }
}

method Upcast(e: Ext)
  modifies e
{
  var b := e as Base;
  b.x := 0; // e's invariant is preserved here
  e.y := 1; // and here
}
```

> Invariants are related to the `Valid()` idiom (e.g., of `{:autocontracts}`); however, invariants need not be made

Reviewer: Worth mentioning the "Frames" standard library encodes the idiom as well: https://github.com/dafny-lang/dafny/blob/master/Source/DafnyStandardLibraries/src/Std/Frames.dfy

explicit in specifications nor can they be invalidated except according to the rules

> above. Lastly, they are (currently) restricted to `reads this`. Invariants are also related to the constraints of subset

Reviewer: ```suggestion
above. Lastly, they are (currently) restricted to reading only fields of the current instance. Invariants are also related to the constraints of subset
```

Just to avoid implying `reads this` is valid syntax on `invariant`s.
